---
title: "Using the waggle dance"
author: "Joe Palmer"
date: "25/10/2021"
---

# Slide 1 - Background of collective behaviour / self organisation

Foraging is a complex task which requires individuals to both locate and exploit resources in their environment. These pressures have lead to the evolution of some extremely complex and cleaver adaptations. One animal group which has evolved a neat way of doing this are the social insects, which take working collectively to a whole new level. In these societies, individual information is pooled and a collective decision is made on the full information. This is not a directed process and is the result of a phenomena called self organisation. Self-organised collective decisions occur when the rules individuals follow creates a collective mechanism which, almost as a side effect, finds the best solution. These phenomena can be found across examples of collective behaviour. In schooling fish and flocking birds the dazzling visual displays and patterns are formed from a very simple model of move in the direction your neighbour moves. Simple rule but makes an adaptive collective response. Social insects have even moe advanced systems of self organisation. In ants, individuals will search for a food source and upon finding it will lay a pheromone trail back to the colony. Other ants find these trails and will follow it. If they make a judgment that it is good stuff they will also lay a pheromone trail on their way back to the colony, if they don't then they will continue looking for a food source. The result of this in the aggregate is the colony is able to explore multiple different food sources and pool individual assessments to identify the best one. These better resources have more pheromone laid on them so they attract more individuals and those not so good recruit much less. This allows for a proportional response.

# Slide 2 - Honeybees and the waggle dance

Honeybees are quite special in the social insect work as whilst they share similar traits with other species in terms of societal structures and worker organisation, they have evolved a unique behaviour, so unique in fact it is only seen in honeybees. This behaviour is the waggle dance, whereby, upon finding a suitable food source, workers perform a dance which provides nest-mates with the distance and the direction from the hive to a particular flower patch. This behaviour allows honeybees to forage over vast ranges, as high as 100km$^2$. Being such an amazing behaviour it has unsurprisingly attracted a significant amount of study since its first reported decoding by Von Fritch in the 50's, but it took another 20 odd years before thomas seeley came along and performed a catalog of studies which identified key features of the dance. For example, he showed that workers modulate dancing in relation to foraging efficiency (how far away the food source is balanced by how good the nectar quality is, closer better quality patches elicit more dancing than further less quality ones). He also showed foragers use the time taken to find a worker to unload them of nectar when returning from foraging as an indicator of how desperate the colony is for nectar, and factored this into their dancing enthusiasm. As well as this he also showed that recruits don't compare dances and instead will follow whatever dance they bump into on the dance floor. Putting this all together, Seeley and his colleagues suggested a self organised strategy for honeybee foraging: Scout bees go out and explore the landscape. Once they find something they return to the colony and dance for it, dancing more for better quality resources and less for lower quality resources. Recruits wander the dance floor randomly and will follow the first resource they bump into. As more profitable sites are danced for more, the most profitable resources attract the most recruits. They then repeat the assessment process, creating a self-enhancing mechanism which locates the best resource. This theory is generally accepted as the primary mechanism going on, in the sense that their haven't been any alternatives. Nevertheless, whilst the individual components come with solid empirical evidence, how they all fit together, described by seeley, has not been empirically verified.

Nevertheless, interest in the waggle dance remains high not least because it centers around choice. Within a colony, individuals have the capacity to choose whether they should find a resource for themselves or follow another individual. In essence, this behaviour captures the use of social vs personal information and so their is considerable interest in identifying the conditions which favour individuals using personal vs social information and thus allowing researchers to evaluate the conditions which lead to the evolution of cooperative and collective behaviours. (The long view). Over the last couple of decades researchers have used theoretical (paper list) and empirical (paper list) studies to try and work out when using the waggle dance might offer an advantage or disadvantage, despite the attention the topic remains contested on exactly how environmental factors influence the use of the waggle dance, yet a general consensus has emerged that honeybee colonies, as a whole, adopt a flexible use.

Much of the problem with evaluating honeybee foraging behaviours in the wild is that they are small, numerous and travel great distances. Consequently they are all but impossible to track, unlike ants for example. Advancing the debate on waggle dance use requires new methods which can actually capture how much the dance is being used.

In an effort to do this, we return to seeley's theory of honeybee foraging and ask what these different strategies of forager behaviour might look like when represented in the pattern of waggle dances reported on the dance-floor.

# Slide 3 - Overview of our model

If flowers are randomly distributed in the environment around a centrally located hive, the distance from the hive to the flowers will follow an exponential distribution. If a scout moves through the environment on some random trajectory and reports back the first flower patch discovered, the distribution of dances from multiple scouts should therefore be exponential. The number of dances are altered by how efficient the foraging trip was. This means some function of distance and quality influences the distribution of dances on the dance floor. Seeley reports this function is efficiency: $\frac{gain-cost}{cost}$ ->

# Slide 4 - The simulation (prove they're different)

# Slide 5 - Applied to waggle dance data

# Conclusion - Method captures the behaviour well, allows us to extract a proportion of scouts and thus a measure of waggle dance use in a colony.

# Slide 6 - Next research question (how environment influences use of the waggle dance)

No significant difference in proportion of scouts between agri-rural and urban environments, however, also investigate how different land use types influence the proportion of scouts. This is significant.
